### Overview

For data processing, FERMO needs pre-processed LC-MS/MS data in form of a peaktable. This is briefly discussed in the README of the [FERMO repository](https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/). Below, you can find instructions on how to generate the peaktable using MZmine3. For experieneced users, minimal instructions are given in the paragraph **MZmine3 peaktable export overview**. A thorough guide can be found in the paragraph **MZmine3 step-by-step guide**.

### MZmine3 peaktable export

Prepare the peaktable by processing the LC-MS/MS data with MZmine3. Export the peaktable via **'Feature list methods'** → **'Export feature list'** → **'GNPS - feature based molecular networking'**. Settings can be left default except for: **'Filter rows: ALL'**, **'Feature intensity: Peak height'**, **'CSV export: ALL'**. Save the files to a folder of your choice, start FERMO as indicated in the **Installation instructions** of the README, and load the peaktable and .mgf-file in the **Peaktable processing page (standard mode)**.

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/peaktable_export.png|alt=peaktable_export.png]]

If you do not know how to process your data with MZmine3, see below

### MZmine3 step-by-step guide

**Disclaimer: described below is a 'basic' workflow for inexperienced users, and processing steps have been chosen for simplicity over performance.**

1. Download the newest version of [MZmine3](http://mzmine.github.io/) and install it on your computer. 

2. To process "raw" LC-MS/MS data with MZmine3, the data has to be in a format readable by MZmine3. Mass spectrometry instruments usually generate data in a vendor-specific binary format. Mzmine3 can read some of these formats, in particular the formats **RAW (Thermo Scientific)**, **RAW (Waters)**, **TDF** and **TSF (Bruker)**. Other vendor-specific formats have to be converted first to a text-based format, such as .mzXML or its successor, the .mzML format. This can be done using the **msConvert** program of the **ProteoWizard** suite, which can be downloaded from (the ProteoWizard website)[https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/]. Another option is to use the [online conversion tool](https://gnps-quickstart.ucsd.edu/conversion) on the GNPS website. An excellent tutorial on using **ProteoWizard** and LC-MS/MS data conversion in general can be found in the [GNPS documentation](https://ccms-ucsd.github.io/GNPSDocumentation/fileconversion/). 

3. Once LC-MS/MS data is in a format readable by MZmine3, it can be imported and processed in two ways: 1) by loading an MZmine3-specific batch file, which contains instructions on the steps to perform on the raw LC-MS/MS data; or 2) by performing the steps manually in the graphical user interface. The former is intended for data for which parameters are already known, while the latter allows user to explore the data and fine-tune the parameters. A description on the steps of a 'standard' workflow can be found below.

4. Import LC-MS/MS data into MZmine3 by going to **'Raw data methods'** → **'Raw data import'** and clicking on the import button respective to the data format at hand.

5. Once imported, the masses contained in the data have to be detected. In a nutshell, a LC-MS/MS analysis run is made up by numerous consecutive scans. Each scan is like a *snapshot* of what the instrument can *see* at that particular moment. Usually, MS (MS1) survey scans are intertwined with tandem MS (MS2) fragmentation scans. MS1 and MS2 spectra need to be processed separately. For MS1, perform the following step: **'Raw data methods'** → **'Mass detection'** → **'Mass detection'**, with default settings except: **'Raw data files: All raw data files'**, **'Scans: MS level 1'**; **'Mass detector: Centroid'**; **'Noise Level: see below'**. The noise level is data-specific and the easiest way to set this parameter sensibly is to check the data in the live preview and set the value so that the instrument noise is cut off (also called "cutting the grass"). 

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/mzmine3_ms1_detection.png|alt=mzmine3_ms1_detection.png]]

6. After MS1 mass detection, the MS2 spectra have to be processed too: **'Raw data methods'** → **'Mass detection'** → **'Mass detection'**, with default settings except for: **'Raw data files: All raw data files'**, **'Scans: MS level 2'**; **'Mass detector: Centroid'**; **'Noise Level: see below'**. Again, the noise level is best determined by looking at the raw data and 'cutting the grass'.

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/mzmine3_ms2_detection.png|alt=mzmine3_ms2_detection.png]]

7. Once MS1 and MS2 spectra have been processed, the massed detected in the MS1 spectra are used to create time/signal intensity curves, so-called extracted ion chromatograms. For this, execute the following step: **'Feature detection'** → **'LC-MS'** → **'ADAP chromatogram builder'**, with default settings except **'Raw data files: All raw data files'**; **'Scans: MS level 1'**; **'Min group size in # of scans: see below'**; **'Group intensity threshold: see below'**; **'Min highest intensity : see below'**; **'Scan to scan accuracy: see below'**. The user-dependent parameters are intended to reduce the probability to pick up noise signals. For the parameter **'Min group size in # of scans'**, give the minimum number of consecutive scans a mass must appear in to be considered a trace, and should be reasonably high (e.g. 8). The parameter **'Group intensity threshold'** sets the minimum intensity of a signal to be considered member of a group. This parameter needs to be set by looking at any known compound in the chromatogram, and determining the minimum intensity at which the first scan related to this compound rises from the 'grass' (i.e. the noise). The parameter **'Min highest intensity'** sets the minimum intensity a mass needs to reach so that a new chromatogram is started. To determine this parameter, check which maximum intensity the instrument noise reaches, and set a value below that, taking into account a safety margin (e.g. if the instrument noise is around 1E1, you can set the parameter to 3E1). The parameter **'Scan to scan accuracy'** indicates the mass deviation that can be expected between scans. The mass deviation can be estimated by looking at consecutive scans of a known compound, and calculating the average mass deviation. 

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/mzmine3_chrom_building.png|alt=mzmine3_chrom_building.png]]

8. After chromatograms have been created, individual peaks have to be resolved (split up). The easiest method is the baseline cutoff, where the baseline is increased until non-resolved peaks with local minima are split by the new baseline. Execute: **'Feature detection'** → **'chromatogram resolving'** → **'Baseline resolver'**, with default settings except **'Feature lists: all feature lists'**, **'MS/MS scan pairing: ticked'**, **'Min peak height: see below'**; **'Peak duration range: see below'**; **'Baseline level: see below'**; **'Min # of data points: see below'**. The parameter **'Min peak height'** sets the minimal height/intensity a peak must reach to be considered signal and not noise, and has to be determined by looking at the data. A pragmatic way to do this is to take the average height of a number of low-intensity peaks with nice (gaussian) peak shapes. The parameter **'Peak duration range'** depends on the LC method and the column used, and can be estimated by looking at a peak corresponding to a known compound. The parameter **'Baseline level'** is the absolute cutoff below which all data points are deleted and on which a 'new' x-axis is drawn. The **'Min # of data points'** sets the minimum number of consecutive mass signals a peak is allowed to have. This needs to be a minimum of 3 (start, maximum, stop), but should ideally be higher, and needs to be assessed by looking at the number of scans in the peak of a known compound.

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/mzmine3_baseline_cutoff.png|alt=mzmine3_baseline_cutoff.png]]

9. After individual peaks have been resolved, isotopic peaks coming from the same compound need to be collapsed, to reduce data redundancy. To do so, go to **'Feature list methods'** → **'Isotopes'** → **'13C isotope filter'**, with default parameter settings except **'Feature lists: all feature lists'**, **'m/z tolerance: see below'**, **'Retention time tolerance:  see below'**. The **m/z tolerance** and the **retention time tolerance** can be set relatively strictly, since the values are coming from a single LC-MS/MS run and should be fairly uniform.

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/mzmine3_13Cdeiso.png|alt=mzmine3_13Cdeiso.png]]

10. After 13C isotopic peaks have been removed, LC-MS runs/samples can be aligned and identical peaks collapsed, to reduce data redundancy. This can be done by going to **'Feature list methods'** → **'Alignment'** → **'Join aligner'**, with default parameter settings except **'m/z tolerance: see below'**; **'Weight for m/z: see below'**; **'Retention time tolerance: see below'**; **'Weight for RT: see below'**. For the parameters **'m/z tolerance'** and **'Retention time tolerance'**, the settings are dependent on how different the mass precision and the retention time variation of the individual samples are from each other. If they have been analyzed as part of the same batch, retention time drift and mass drift should be relatively similar. If samples were part of different batches, retention time drift and mass drift can lead to bigger differences, and therefore require larger tolerances. Similarly, for **'Weight for m/z'** and **'Weight for RT'** values should be adjusted dependent on aforementioned sample similarity. If no weight preference should be given, both values can be set to 50. 


[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/mzmine3_join_aligner.png|alt=mzmine3_join_aligner.png]]

11. After samples have been aligned and peaks collapsed, the peak list can be filtered by applying **'Feature list methods'** → **'Feature list filtering'**. The filters can be applied upon individual preferences, but we suggest to use **'Feature List Row Filter'** and set a filter on the retention time window, so that the solvent peak at the beginning of the instrument run is filtered out. Also, we suggest to remove the wash step at the end of the LC gradient. In this case, the field **'Never remove feature with MS2 scan'** must not be ticked.

12. After the optional filtering step, the peak list can be exported to be analyzed with FERMO. For this, go to **'Feature list methods'** → **'Export feature list'** → **'GNPS - feature based molecular networking'** and default settings except for **'Filter rows: ALL'**, **'Feature intensity: Peak height'**, **'CSV export: ALL'**. Save the files to a folder of your choice.

[[https://github.com/mmzdouc/FERMO/blob/main/wiki_assets/peaktable_export.png|alt=peaktable_export.png]]

13. The peaktable export leads to three files. Only two of them are used for the further analysis: the peaktable, which is a file ending with **'_quant_full.csv'**, and the file containing the MS/MS data, ending with **'.mgf'**. The third file, which ends in '_quant.csv', only contains limited information and is not used further. If the file ending in **'_quant_full.csv'** is missing, verify if the file export in MZmine3 was performed with the setting **'CSV export: ALL'**.
